An outstanding fact
is recorded at Isaiah 55:10, 11:
“For just as the rain and the snow
pour down from heaven
“and do not return there
until they saturate the earth,
“making it produce and sprout,
“giving seed to the sower
and bread to the eater,
“[now notice this]
“so my word [my word]
“that goes out of my mouth will be.
“It will not return to me without results,
“but it will certainly accomplish
whatever is my delight.”
The word of God
is the statement of his purpose.
Now, it can be delivered orally
or in writing.
We call the Bible God’s written Word,
and rightly so.
But long before writing was invented,
Jehovah expressed his purpose in words.
“And God said: ‘Let there be light.’
Then there was light.”
Through Isaiah, Jehovah is telling us
that he will always accomplish his purpose.
So no matter how powerful fighters
against that purpose seem to be,
they will always lose in the end.
Remembering that will help us when we’re
faced with opposers who seem unbeatable.
So I thought we might consider some
Bible examples that illustrate the point.
Take the days of King Saul, for example.
Now, Jehovah sent Samuel
to anoint the next king of Israel.
And as recorded at 1 Samuel 16:1,
God said to Samuel:
“I will send you to Jesse the Bethlehemite,
“because I have selected
from among his sons
a king for myself.”
Saul’s replacement turned out to be David.
He was Jehovah’s choice.
At some point, Saul himself understood that.
In fact, according to 1 Samuel 23:17,
his son Jonathan said to David:
“You will be king over Israel, . . .
and my father Saul also knows that.”
Confirming this, on one occasion
Saul said to David:
“I know that you will surely rule as king.”
In spite of it all, Saul tried to kill David.
And he had the support of a powerful army.
Saul himself was apparently a very strong man.
Still, it was God’s will
for David to become king,
and Saul knew it.
So we ask: Why did Saul keep on fighting?
And whom was he fighting, really?
Not just David.
He was fighting against God.
Saul was setting himself up for failure.
No doubt Satan was egging Saul on.
If Satan could cause
just one of Jehovah’s promises to fail—
But in the end, the word of God prevailed.
David became king.
Well, who would replace David
when the time came?
That was also Jehovah’s decision to make,
and he made it.
According to 1 Chronicles 22:9, 10,
Jehovah told David:
“Look! You will have a son . . .
“Solomon will be his name
“and . . . I will firmly establish the throne
of his kingship over Israel forever.”
So Solomon would be the next king of Israel.
Who could prevent that from happening?
David’s son Adonijah tried and failed.
Why?
As quoted at 1 Kings 2:15, he later admitted:
“The kingship eluded me
and became my brother’s,
for it was from Jehovah that it became his.”
If Adonijah thought
he could outmaneuver Jehovah,
he was sadly mistaken.
Jehovah promised the Israelites
that he would give them
the land of Canaan as an inheritance.
The Canaanites had other ideas.
They had heard of Jehovah’s powerful works
in Egypt,
but they fought against him anyway.
They learned.
They learned at their cost
that fighters against God always lose.
Now, if you were asked to name
some prominent fighters
against God in Jesus’ day,
you might think of King Herod the Great,
the Jewish High Priest Caiaphas,
and maybe the Roman Governor Pontius Pilate.
Let’s talk about them.
First, Herod the Great.
Let’s read Matthew 2:1, 2.
Now, astrologers visit King Herod,
and they ask a strange question.
We read:
“After Jesus had been born
in Bethlehem of Judea
“in the days of Herod the king, look!
“astrologers from the East
came to Jerusalem,
“saying:
‘Where is the one born king of the Jews?
“‘[king of the Jews?]
“‘For we saw his star
when we were in the East,
and we have come to do obeisance to him.’”
Did you notice something strange here?
No angel had spoken to those astrologers,
yet when the men saw a light in heaven,
they concluded that it signaled
the birth of the “king of the Jews.”
That’s a stretch!
Who do you suppose
put that idea in their head?
And who do you suppose
gave them the bright idea
to ask the present king of Israel
about his future rival?
That has Satan the Devil written all over it,
doesn’t it?
Now notice verses 3 and 4:
“At hearing this, King Herod was agitated,
“and all Jerusalem with him.
“On gathering together all the chief priests
and scribes of the people,
“he inquired of them where
the Christ was to be born.”
Interesting!
Herod doesn’t just ask where
the future “king of the Jews” will be born;
he asks “where the Christ [will] be born.”
Now, as a Jewish proselyte,
he’s supposed to be waiting for the Christ,
the Messiah.
Yet, now that the Messiah has come,
Herod wants to kill him.
Herod is fighting against God.
Does he win?
No.
Jesus escapes his clutches.
And a few months later, Herod himself dies.
Few mourn his death.
In Jesus’ day, the Jewish high priests
were appointed and removed by the Romans.
Now, High Priest Caiaphas
was a skilled politician.
He knew how to please the Romans.
And because of that, he hung on to his job
a lot longer than many others.
And he had a powerful supporter,
Pontius Pilate.
With his connections,
Caiaphas seemed untouchable.
Pilate himself was very well-connected.
He had a good friend in high places in Rome:
Lucius Sejanus.
Now, maybe you’ve never heard
of Sejanus before,
but he was probably the most powerful man
in the Roman Empire.
The emperor left most of the major decisions
to Sejanus.
Now, he made many enemies,
but they were powerless against him
until—until—the fall of 31 C.E.
At that time,
Sejanus got on the wrong side of the emperor
and was put to death.
After that,
the emperor commanded
that anyone who had been friends
with Sejanus was to be executed.
How do you think Pilate felt?
He must have been a nervous wreck!
As we said, he and Sejanus
had been very close.
And now, a year and a half
after Sejanus was executed,
what do you suppose Pilate was thinking
when the Jewish rulers cried out,
‘If you release Jesus,
you are no friend of Caesar’?
Some scholars believe that this was a factor
in Pilate’s decision
to order Jesus’ execution
—to protect his own job.
Did he protect it?
No.
Pilate wasn’t immediately
struck by lightning.
But less than four years
after he sentenced Jesus to death,
he got into big trouble
and was recalled to Rome.
With no powerful friend to defend him,
Pilate was removed as Roman governor.
What happened next isn’t clear.
Some say Pilate committed suicide.
Others say he was banished.
Whatever happened, it wasn’t good.
When Pilate lost his job,
Caiaphas lost his protector
and soon he was removed as high priest.
Thus, two fighters against God,
Pilate and Caiaphas, were dispatched
soon after they committed
their greatest crime.
We certainly don’t want to be fighters
against Jehovah God.
How can we cooperate with his purpose today?
Consider this scenario:
A brother offends you,
says something thoughtless.
You’re hurt.
Now, how does Jehovah view that person?
He’s God’s friend.
Jehovah loves his friends.
He wants you to love them too.
Now, what’s God’s purpose
for the brother who offended you?
He wants him to enjoy life forever.
Now, how can you
work along with Jehovah’s purpose?
If you can just overlook the offense,
Jehovah will appreciate that.
But if you can’t overlook it,
Jehovah would want you to approach
the person in a kind, respectful way.
You might say something like this:
“Maybe I’m being too sensitive,
“but I was hurt
by what you said the other day.
“Now, I know you didn’t mean to hurt me,
but I thought I’d let you know how I felt.”
If the person responds favorably
and unity is restored,
can you imagine how pleased Jehovah will be?
In Matthew chapter 18, Jesus gave
the illustration of the lost sheep.
A man had 100 sheep.
One got lost.
The shepherd left the 99 in the field
and went to great lengths
to find the sheep that had strayed
and bring it back to the fold.
Is it a coincidence
that right after telling that story,
Jesus outlined three steps we should follow
when someone has sinned seriously
against us?
At Matthew 18:15,
Jesus tells us what our goal should be
when we follow those steps.
Let’s read that:
“Moreover, if your brother commits a sin,
“go and reveal his fault
between you and him alone.
“If he listens to you, [notice]
you have gained your brother.”
The brother who sinned against us
may be like that lost sheep.
What should be our goal?
To gain our brother, not to expose him,
not to get revenge, not to prove him wrong,
not to shame him, but to get him back.
Like that loving shepherd,
we are willing to go
to great lengths to bring
that erring brother back to the fold.
Of course, if the brother
is an unrepentant sinner,
the elders will follow the third step
outlined by Jesus
and he’ll be removed from the congregation.
How else can we work along
with Jehovah’s purpose?
We can do that by being involved
in the preaching work.
The word has gone out:
“This good news of the Kingdom
[must] be preached
in all the inhabited earth.”
Many have tried
to prevent that from happening.
In the early 20th century,
a few prominent brothers opposed
the organization’s efforts
to get everyone involved
in the preaching work.
Those dignitaries were quite happy
to get all dressed up
and give public talks to large audiences,
but they refused to “lower themselves”
to go from house to house.
They were fighting against God,
and the angels soon sifted them out.
Most of them were never heard of again.
Even in countries
where there’s a measure of religious freedom,
fighters against God have tried to prevent us
from carrying out our commission.
“You need a permit to go from house to house.
“You can’t offer magazines on the street.
You people are a dangerous sect.”
They’ve even enacted laws
directed at stopping our work.
Unless they change their ways,
those lawmakers
are going to be in big trouble.
The word has gone out: “As you go, preach.”
That great work will be accomplished,
with their support or in spite of them.
Well, we mentioned, fighters against God
sometimes seem to get away
with their acts of rebellion.
But they’re on a slippery slope.
I can’t express it better than David did
at Psalm 37:1, 2:
“Do not be upset because of evil men
“or envious of wrongdoers.
“They will quickly wither like grass
and shrivel like green new grass.”
So when you hear about powerful opposers
who seem to be untouchable,
remember what we’ve discussed.
These men may seem to prosper for a while,
but since they’re fighting against God,
they’re more to be pitied than to be feared.
They’re on the wrong side.
They are fighting a losing battle.